Alright time for the next challenge this
is the minimum and maximum challenge so
you were to read numbers from the
console entered by the user and print
the minimum and maximum number the user
has entered in that session so before
the user enters each number print the
message enter number now if the user
enters an invalid number break out of the loop
and print the minimum and maximum number
has been entered so far in that session
and you want to use an endless while
loop here and Korean approach it with
the name min and max input challenge so
that's it see if you can figure out that
to challenge pause the video now and try
it out and once you're ready to see my
version of the code come back and we'll
go through it so pause the video now
okay welcome back hopefully you managed
to get it working alright so let's get
started first thing we need to do is
create our scanner as well as the close
method call so let's do that as we've
been doing in recent videos so a scanner
scanner is equal to new scanner
parenthesis system dot in we need to
make sure here that we choose the right
one scanner to us sorry scanner Java dot
util and again you know you've got the
right one there if you see import Java
dot util dot scanner let's have the code
to close the scanner it's a good habit
to get into
and the code we're going to be typing
will be in the middle alright we no need
to read the numbers and then from them
figure out the minimum and maximum
number we're going to start by adding
two in variables to track the minimum
and maximum numbers so int min equals
zero it's max equals zero next we want
to loop through until the user enters an
invalid number so I'm going to do a
while true and enter sleep again as we
discussed in the previous challenge and
again the while true loop which we're
doing there on line 14 creates an
endless loop in other words a loop that
doesn't complete to stop it we can use a
break statement that'll break out of the
loop when the user enters an invalid
value now to test whether it's a valid
number will again use the has next
in method and break out or break out of
the loop rather when it returns false
before the user starts entering numbers
we need to print out that message that
we had in the challenge so let's go
ahead and do that first enter number all
right so the next step now is to get the
input from the user so let's create as
we've done previously boolean variable
here for boolean is an int equal scanner
dot has next int no space is out so we
can read it a bit better again we've got
this sub warning here talking about
unreachable code because we haven't yet
coded a way to exit out of the while
loop so what we're going to do there is
put a test as we did also in the last
challenge if isn't it else what we're
going to do is out of the code block if
it's not an int we'll add that as well
we're also go down outside of that if
code block and put scanner dot next line
again we've talked about the reasons why
we need to use that we're just will
handle input because we know now what
that's so all about alright so in this
case the else block will execute it's a
boolean variable is an int is false
meaning that the user has entered an
invalid number so that is the case the
code will move to the or statement so
therefore our break statement should be
in the else component about if loop
since our goal of course was to break
out of the loop when invalid input was
entered so we simply need to add a break
in the else I think of the error
disappears on line 28 now I've done that
all right so let's add some more code
now in the troop component of the if
statement so down here we can have to
type in here int number equals scanner
dot next int all right now we need to do
some tests here firstly we want to test
if the number is greater than the
current value of max then we want to
sign assign that number to max since it
would then presently be the largest
value so to check that we can use an if
statement that tests if the number is
greater than max so let's do that test
we'll type it in we're going to put if
number is greater than max and open up a
code block I'm going to type max equals
number okay we'll just place this out so
it's more readable so right so in
summary once the users entered a valid
number meaning is an INT is equal to
true within testing if the number is
greater than the current max we're doing
that test on line 23 if it is we assign
that number to max
meaning that ensuring rather that max
always has the maximum number assigned
to it you know to get the minimum number
we can do something very similar but the
test will go we are doing a less than
test instead of a greater than test so
it'll be if number is less than min then
we will put min equals number so again
you saw the logic was very similar to
max the difference being here that we're
now looking for the minimum value from
the users input so if the number entered
by the user is less than the current
minimum the condition we'll test is true
and the newest input that has been
entered will be replaced as the current
valley for min all right so we've got
most of the code done what we no need to
do is print out the minimum and maximum
valleys after the while loop so let's go
ahead and do that and into the bottom of
the wall loop after the loop is ended
before the close these scale about close
we're going to put min equals plus min
plus comma max equals plus max all right
now before we finish this challenge
there is a small bug that we have in
this code firstly I'm going to
demonstrate the bug and then we can
implement a solution so let's run the
application first all right so I'm going
to begin by entering your three numbers
so I'm going to start with 1 1 2 3 we're
going to break out on the loop by typing
the variety you can see once I've done
that for the output is now min equals 0
max equals 3
technically that's incorrect and the
reason is we've never entered the number
zero the minimum number was we entered
was 1 so consequently there's a small
bug that we've associated with our logic
but there are multiple ways to fix it
now one way would be to use a boolean
flag that checks if the user is entering
the first number and then sets min and
max to that value another way is to set
min and max to extremely high and low in
finales respectively let's first see the
solution with a flag with a boolean flag
so right after the max or close this
window down so we get more space so
right after our max declarations up here
at the top I'm going to type in boolean
first it was true so that is the flag
brilliant first it was true now you
might be wondering what I mean when I
say a flag well basically it's a boolean
value meaning that the value can be true
or false in other words on or off so
that's why
Boyet boolean is often referred to as a
flag you can only have two states true
or false so we've set this boolean to
true while we wait for the user to enter
an initial number when the user enters
the first number what we can do is use
an if statement to set the boolean the
flag here to false that's worth selling
both min and Max to the first numbers
value by selling the flag to false after
the first number the next numbers will
not meet the conditions of the first and
therefore will not be replaced so let's
put the code in and you'll see what I
mean here's I'm going to come down put
the if after the scan next line so I'm
going to put if parentheses first like
so now as previously stated after the
user enters the first number we want to
set the boolean flag to false since the
user can obviously only enter one first
number and the next will set the min and
Max to the value of the first number so
for that code we're gonna start by
topping first in the code block in the
earth without it here we're going to
type first equals false min equals
number and Max equals number as well
so let's review this if statement one
last time
first we're checking if the first number
flag is set to true and attesting then
on line 24 which it should be since we
set it to true before the wallet you can
see the code there on line 13 on screen
when the user enters their first number
the if statement will execute in other
words the code in the code from from
line 25 through 27 will execute in the
first cut and that line 25 when we first
set the first flag to false now when the
user enters a second number the if
statement won't execute and that's
because first is now set to false so in
other words this if statement will truly
ne execute once when the user enters the
first number and then never again at
least that's the theory but let's
actually check it out to make sure that
it works all right so I'm gonna run it
again as you saw I'm going to enter the
same three numbers again 1 2 3 then an
eight-oh exit this time we get the
output the min equals 1 and Max equals 3
indicating that our solution will work
this time because of course previously
the min value was set to zero we never
saw that minimum value get set to 1 all
right so let's run the application again
this time we're gonna enter the values
in reverse 3 2 1 and then an a again so
that the parsing fails and we still got
min equals 1 max equals 3 all right so
that's worked so that's one solution
using a simple flag here at boolean
we've easily managed to overcome that
bug so that's it the challenge is now
complete I'm just going to close down
this window but before we finish the
video I'm going to show you one more
solution that doesn't require a flag now
the idea with this solution is to set
max to the minimum value that an INT can
hold now we can do this because the user
will only be able to enter a number that
is greater or equal to the minimum int
value now the maximum in value is
approximately positive 2 billion while
the minimum is approximately negative 2
billion so with that in mind if we set
max to negative 2 billion any number
what the user enters will always be
greater than negative 2 billion so this
means that we don't need a flare
to ensure that the values of Max and min
are set to numbers that the user enters
as long as they enter at least one
number now this might sound confusing
but it should hopefully become clearer
in your mind once you see the code the
first things I'm going to do is comment
out the code that's using the flag so I
need to comment out the line here where
we declared the first a flag and also
the code that does did the test there
when I point that out then this time
instead of setting min to zero and Max
to zero we're going to set min to the
maximum value and it can hold I'm going
to come up here to min on line 11 so I'm
going to set that to 2 1 4 7 4 8 3 6 4 7
so that's the minimum value and
therefore the maximum I'm going to set
that to minors two one four seven four
eight three six four eight so in review
our min value is set to the highest
number and it can hold and our max
variable to the lowest any number that
the user enters will always be the equal
or within the range of those two numbers
so let's test this out to see what if it
works so we're going to enter a number 1
2 3 or a number range 1 2 3 and a to
exit and you can see we've correctly got
the output min equals 1 max equals 3 and
just to be heard of a sense sure let's
run it again 3 2 1 a we still got the
same result min equals 1 mexic was 3 so
that's another solution to solve that
particular problem and again as
mentioned in previous challenges it's
possible to generate correct solutions
with code that's different so if your
code doesn't match mine that's
completely okay the main goal is to get
the application working while meeting
the challenge requirements and you can
even expand on the challenge and add
more features and so forth alright so
just before I end this video I want to
show you the same solution but using
constants so every primitive number type
has constants that represent the minimum
and the maximum value that primitives
can hold now you may have noticed how
comer said it was topping at the minimum
and maximum values the topped on lines
he live in a 12
since we know that we need them maximum
and minimum values in it can hold here
what we can do is we come back up here
say to minimum for example and type
integer the capital y dot max value
instead of actually topping up the
numbers and you may recall that in a
previous video we used the integer class
with methods like pars int but this
class also contains these two constants
min value and Max value so I'm going to
add Max value on the next line then
integers dot min value I should say I
think I said max value so we've got
soaring minimum to the integer drop max
value and Max to the integer dot min
value and basically we've got now these
two things set up and these are the
constant so for example with Max value
that's the maximum number and it can
have and 4 min value that's the minimum
value and it can have and that's exactly
what we need in this case so keep in
mind that every primitive numeric type
has these max value and min value
constants in their respective wrapper
class and again we'll talk more about
wrapper classes later in the course so
instead of typing those large numbers we
can just use these constants which were
easy to type but also easy to understand
what are we trying to achieve alright so
the codes pretty much the same as what
it was before let's test it to make sure
that it still works so going into a
value 1 2 3 and a to exit me at the same
results all right let's do one final
test now I'm going to run it one more
time I'm going to enter the valley's
I'll enter some really big numbers this
time so I will do two one four seven
four eight three six four five which is
very close to the maximum number and
I'll enter a number that's very close to
the minimum negative of two one four
seven four eight three over six three
three a to exit and you can see now that
we've got the minimum correctly set to
the negative two one four seven four
eight three six three three and the
maximum now set to two one four seven
four eight three six four five all right
so that's it I hope you enjoyed this
challenge and learnt a lot from it.
I'll see you in the next video.